
# More Haste, Less Speed !

Programming *is* a craft, and that distinction is at the heart of the matter.
The goal is not to be slow, but to achieve a state of productive, skillful haste
by rejecting the kind of raw speed that leads to mistakes.

Let's do this again, with the correct perspective...

## Introduction: The Craftsman's Paradox

In the craft of software development, we are faced with a paradox. We are driven
to create, to build, to bring solutions to life with urgency and efficiency.
Yet, we are troubled by the knowledge that a blind pursuit of raw velocity—of
"speed"—often leads to flawed, brittle work that ultimately slows us down. This
is the tension between the brutishness of speed and the art of haste.

This document explores the principle of **"Less Speed, More Haste."** It is an
argument for a specific kind of craftsmanship: one that rejects thoughtless
speed in favor of a deliberate, focused haste. This haste is not about rushing;
it is the swift, efficient, and seemingly effortless execution that becomes
possible only *after* deep thought, careful planning, and disciplined practice.
True, sustainable velocity—a performant and reliable system—is the *result* of
this craftsman's haste.

We will use the ChrysaLisp operating system as a primary case study. Its
architecture is a masterclass in achieving hyper-performance and
near-instantaneous build times, not by moving recklessly, but by embodying a
philosophy that prioritizes deliberate design to enable masterful haste.

---

### Part I: Deconstructing the Paradox - Speed vs. Haste

The first step is to reclaim the meanings of these words in the context of a
craft.

**Speed is a raw, unthinking velocity.** It is focused on the immediate metric
of "how fast can this be done?" without regard for quality or consequence. Its
characteristics are:

*   **Reactive:** Driven by immediate pressure and deadlines.

*   **Superficial:** Chooses the quickest, most obvious path, often ignoring
    underlying complexities.

*   **Accumulates Debt:** Leaves a wake of bugs, poor design choices, and
    fragility that must be paid down later at great cost.

*   **Brittle:** Creates systems that are difficult to change or extend.

*   **Solves the symptom:** Addresses the immediate problem without considering
    the root cause.

*   **The Vicious Cycle:** Leads to a cycle of firefighting, where fixing the
    problems caused by speed leaves less time for thoughtful work, forcing even
    more speed.

**Haste is a focused, skillful, and rapid execution.** It is the state of "flow"
achieved by a craftsman who has mastered their tools and their domain. Its
characteristics are:

*   **Proactive & Deliberate:** Springs from a foundation of deep thought and
    careful design.

*   **Insightful:** Chooses the most effective and elegant path, which is often
    non-obvious.

*   **Reduces Debt:** Actively removes complexity and builds robust foundations.

*   **Resilient:** Creates adaptable systems that welcome change.

*   **Solves the problem class:** Eliminates the root cause, preventing future
    issues.

*   **The Virtuous Circle:** Leads to a cycle where robust, simple systems are
    easier to work with, enabling continued haste and high performance.

---

### Part II: The ChrysaLisp Case Study - Haste Through Deliberate Design

ChrysaLisp's performance is a direct result of rejecting raw speed in its design
phase to enable incredible haste in its execution and development.

#### Principle 1: Strategic Problem Avoidance ("Well, Don't Do That Then!")

This philosophy is about choosing a more thoughtful path to completely sidestep
problems that force others to slow down to a crawl.

*   **Example: Concurrency**

    * **The Path of Raw Speed:** Use shared-memory threads. It's the standard,
      "fastest" way to get started. The consequence is a future filled with the
      slow, painful process of debugging deadlocks and data races with complex
      tools like mutexes.

    * **The Path of Deliberate Haste:** Design a system from the ground up based
      on **isolated processes and message passing**. This is a significant
      upfront investment. **The Outcome:** The entire category of shared-memory
      bugs is eliminated. Developers can write concurrent code with confidence
      and haste, knowing that the system's architecture protects them.

*   **Example: Memory Management**

    * **The Path of Raw Speed:** Use a standard garbage collector. It's easier
        for the programmer in the short term.

    * **The Path of Deliberate Haste:** Build a complete memory model based on
        **vector primitives and reference counting**. This requires more
        discipline. **The Outcome:** The system has predictable, real-time
        performance with no GC pauses. The haste of the running system is never
        interrupted by the debt of a "stop-the-world" cleanup.

#### Principle 2: Designing for Adaptability ("Be Formless, Like Water")

Raw speed often leads to rigid designs optimized for a single scenario.
Deliberate haste builds in the flexibility to be fast in *any* scenario.

*   **Example: Task Placement**

    * **The Path of Raw Speed:** Hardcode a simple load-balancing strategy.

    * **The Path of Deliberate Haste:** Design a **dual-mode system** that
        supports both explicit, application-directed task placement and a more
        complex, emergent, kernel-assisted placement. **The Outcome:** The
        system can adapt its form to its hardware container. The application
        runs with optimal performance whether on a single core or a massive,
        fluid cluster, because the "slow" work of designing for adaptability was
        done first.

#### Principle 3: The Discipline of Cooperative Internals ("Know Thyself")

This is where the craftsman's touch is most evident. The system's internal
components are built with a deep understanding of each other, allowing for
simple, cooperative logic instead of slow, defensive checks.

*   **Example: Iteration Over Recursion**

    * **The Path of Raw Speed:** Allow deep recursion, which can be faster to
        write for some problems.

    * **The Path of Deliberate Haste:** Enforce a discipline of **iteration
        using a heap-allocated work-stack**. This requires more thought from the
        programmer. **The Outcome:** This discipline allows for tiny, fixed-size
        task stacks. This makes tasks incredibly lightweight, enabling massive
        concurrency. This system-wide performance gain is a direct result of
        rejecting the "speed" of a locally convenient but globally expensive
        programming pattern.

---

### Part III: Cultivating the Craftsman's Haste

Your feeling of being "troubled" is the mark of a craftsman. It is the intuition
that there is a better way than mere speed. Here is how to cultivate it.

1.  **Embrace the Two Rhythms: Deliberation and Haste.**

    * **The Rhythm of Deliberation (Architect Mode):** This is your "slow" time.
        The goal is not to produce, but to understand. Sketch, question, and
        explore. Ask, "How can I make this problem disappear?" This is where you
        earn the right to be hasty later.

    * **The Rhythm of Haste (Builder Mode):** Once the design is sound, work
        with focused, confident haste. You can move swiftly because the path is
        clear and the foundation is solid. This is the "flow state" of the
        craftsman.

2.  **Listen to "The Trouble" as a Critical Signal.**

    When you feel that nagging worry that you're moving too fast, pause. That is
    the voice of your craft. Ask yourself:

    * **What is the long-term cost of this shortcut?** Who will pay for it, and
        when?

    * **Am I solving the real problem, or just the immediate one?**

    * **Is this solution simple and robust?** Or is it merely clever and
        fragile?

3.  **Measure Progress by the Reduction of Complexity.** Do not measure your
    worth by lines of code written. A master craftsman can often achieve more by
    taking something away. True progress is making the system simpler, more
    robust, and easier to understand. A day spent deleting code and simplifying
    a design is an incredibly productive day.

4.  **Invest Disproportionately in Your Primitives.** Spend your most
    deliberate, "slow" thinking on the foundational 20% of your system. A
    well-crafted core, like ChrysaLisp's `hmap` or mail system, enables
    incredible haste when building everything else on top of it.

## Conclusion

"More Haste, Less Speed" is the mantra of the software craftsman. It is the
recognition that the most performant, reliable, and elegant systems are not born
from a frantic rush. They are the product of a deliberate, thoughtful process
that removes obstacles, simplifies complexity, and eliminates entire classes of
future problems.

*   **Speed** is a short-term loan taken against the future, with an interest
    rate paid in bugs and maintenance.

*   **Haste** is the dividend paid on an upfront investment in good design.

The ultimate goal is a **performant outcome**. But the path to that outcome is
through the deliberate, skillful, and focused haste of a craftsman, not the
thoughtless, brutish velocity of raw speed.
